# Introduction

What is functional programming? Opinions differ, and it is difficult to give aprecise definition. Generally speaking, however, functional programming can beviewed as a style of programming in which the basic method of computation isthe application of functions to arguments. In turn, a functional programminglanguage is one that supports and encourages the functional style.

In general, programming languages such as Java in which the basic method ofcomputation is changing stored values are called imperative languages, becauseprograms in such languages are constructed from imperative instructions thatspecify precisely how the computation should proceed.

However, many imperative languages do not encourage programming in the functional style.

Haskell programs are often between two and ten times shorter than programs written in other languages.

> More generally, higher-order functions can be used to define domain-specific languages within Haskell itself, such as for list processing, interactive programming, and parsing.

> Lazy evaluation ensures that programs terminate whenever possible.

> For example, the language provides a range of library functions that can be used with any type that is functorial , applicative, monadic, foldable, or traversable.

> Because programs in Haskell are pure functions, simple equational reason-ing techniques can be used to execute programs, to transform programs, toprove properties of programs, and even to calculate programs directly fromspecifications of their intended behaviour. Equational reasoning is partic-ularly powerful when combined with the use of induction to reason aboutfunctions that are defined using recursion.

## Historical Background

**Do check the full timeline, it's very instructive.**

- Lisp had some influences from the lambda calculus, but still retained the concept of variable assignment as a central feature of the language.
- In the 1990s, Philip Wadler and others developed the concept of type classes to support overloading, and the use of monads to handle effects, two of the main innovative features of Haskell.


