# Foldables and Friends

In mathematics, a monoid is a set together with an associative operator thatcombines two elements from the set, and an identity element for the operator.For example, the set of integers forms a monoid with the operator given by addition and the identity element by the value zero.

```hs
class Monoid a where
   mempty :: a
   mappend :: a -> a -> a

   mconcat :: [a] -> a
   mconcat = foldr mappend mempty
```

That is, for a type a to be an instance of the class Monoid, it must support avalue mempty and a function mappend of the specified types, which respectivelyplay the role of the identity element and the operator for the monoid. In practice,the function mappend is often written as an infix operator by enclosing its name in single back quotes, as in `x ‘mappend‘ y`.

> The naming choice is unfortunate. All that is required is respecting the Monoid laws.

However, multiple instance declarations of the same type for the same class arenot permitted in Haskell, so attempting to declare two separate instances forMonoid Int in this manner will result in an error. The solution is to introduce special-purpose wrapper types for each of the two instances.

We conclude this section by noting that the library also provides an infix version of mappend, defined by `x <> y = x ‘mappend‘ y`, which allows monoid expressions to be written more concisely, as in `x <> y <> z`.

## Foldables

One of the primary applications of monoids in Haskell is to combine all the values in a data structure to give a single value.

```hs
fold :: Monoid a => [a] -> a
fold []     = mempty
fold (x:xs) = x `mappend` fold xs

data Tree a = Leaf a | Node (Tree a) (Tree a)
              deriving Show

fold :: Monoid a => Tree a -> a
fold (Leaf x)   = x
fold (Node l r) = fold l `mappend` fold r
```

`Data.Foldable`:

```hs
class Foldable t where
   fold    :: Monoid a => t a -> a
   foldMap :: Monoid b => (a -> b) -> t a -> b
   foldr   :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> t a -> b
   foldl   :: (a -> b -> a) -> a -> t b -> a
```

1. Why are there so many functions in the class? In particular, one mightask why additional primitives such as null, length, and so on are provided asmethods in the Foldable class, rather than as definitions in the foldable library.The reason is to allow the default definitions to be overridden if required, which would not be possible if they were defined as top-level functions.
1. What do we need to define manually? The minimal complete definition foran instance of the Foldable class is to define either foldMap or foldr, as allother functions in the class can be derived from either of these two using thedefault definitions and the instance for lists. As we have already seen with lists and trees, it is often simplest to define the function foldMap.
1. What about efficiency? For many applications using the default definitionsthat are provided in the class will suffice, but if greater efficiency is requiredthese can be overridden, as noted above. In practice, the GHC system uses moreefficient default definitions than the simple versions we have presented, but these are functionally equivalent to our simpler versions.

We conclude this section by noting that GHC automatically imports the li-brary Data.Foldable, but currently hides the fold and toList methods of theclass. For this reason, we generally prefer to explicitly import Data.Foldablewhen programming with foldable types, rather than relying on the cut-down version that is automatically provided.

## Generic Functions

```hs
average :: [Int] -> Int
average ns = sum ns ‘div‘ length ns

-- Now it can be applied to both lists and trees
average :: Foldable t => t Int -> Int
average ns = sum ns ‘div‘ length ns
```

## Traversables

```hs
traverse :: (a -> Maybe b) -> [a] -> Maybe [b]
traverse g []     = pure []
traverse g (x:xs) = pure (:) <*> g x <*> traverse g xs

-- Example
dec :: Int -> Maybe Int
dec n = if n > 0 then Just (n-1) else Nothing
-- > traverse dec [1,2,3]
-- Just [0,1,2]
```

Traversable Types:

```hs
class (Functor t, Foldable t) => Traversable t where
   traverse :: Applicative f => (a -> f b) -> t a -> f (t b)
```

The requirement that t is a functor reflects the fact thattraversables generalise the idea of mapping, and are hence expected to supportthe fmap primitive. The requirement that t is foldable ensures that values in a traversable type can also be folded up if desired.
