# Lazy Evaluation

More formally, in Haskell any two different ways of evaluating the same expression will always produce the same final value, provided that they both terminate.

## Evaluation Strategies

An expression that has the form of a function applied to one or more arguments that can be ‘reduced’ by performing the application is called a reducible expression, or redex for short.

As indicated by the use of quotations marks in the preceding sentence, such reductions do not necessarily decrease the size of an expression, although in practice this is often the case.

Innermost evaluation can also be characterised in terms of how arguments are passed to functions. In particular, using this strategy ensures that arguments are always fully evaluated before functions are applied. That is, arguments are passed by value.

In terms of how arguments are passed to functions, using outermost evaluation allows functions to be applied before their arguments are evaluated. For this reason, we say that arguments are passed by name.

We conclude this section by noting that many built-in functions require their arguments to be evaluated before being applied, even when using outermost evaluation. For example, as illustrated in the calculation above, built-in arithmetic operators such as * and + cannot be applied until their two arguments have beenevaluated to numbers. Functions with this property are called *strict*, and will be discussed in further detail at the end of this chapter.

## Lambda Expressions

Currying alters the sequence of reductions.

Note that in Haskell, the selection of redexes within the bodies lambda ex-pressions is prohibited. The rationale for not ‘reducing under lambdas’ is thatfunctions are viewed as black boxes that we are not permitted to look inside.More formally, the only operation that can be performed on a function is thatof applying it to an argument. As such, reduction within the body of a functionis only permitted once the function has been applied.

Using innermost and outermost evaluation, but not within lambda expressions, is normally referred to as call-by-value and call-by-name evaluation, respectively.
