# Types and Classes

- We use the notation `v :: T` to mean that `v` is a value in the type `T`, and say that `v` has type `T`.
- More generally, the symbol `::` can also be used with expressions that have not yet been evaluated, in which case the notation `e :: T` means that evaluation of the expression `e` will produce a value of type `T`.
- See page 23 for the summary of how type inference works.
- The downside of type safety is that some expressions that evaluate successfully will be rejected on type grounds.
- We conclude this section by noting that a single number may have more than one numeric type. For example, the number 3 could have type `Int`, `Integer`, `Float` or `Double`.
- The precision on `floats` and `doubles` depends upon the its size on memory.
- The number of elements in a list is called its length. The list [] of length zero is called the empty list, while lists of length one, such as [False], [’a’], and [[]] are called singleton lists.
- A tuple is a finite sequence of components of possibly different types, with the components being enclosed in round parentheses and separated by commas.
    - The number of components in a tuple is called its *arity*.
    - Tuples of arity one, such as `(False)`, are not permitted because they would conflict with the use of parentheses.
- Note that there is no restriction that functions must be total on their argument type, in the sense that there may be some arguments for which the result is not defined.
- Currying
    - Functions with multiple arguments can also be handled in another, perhaps less obvious way, by exploiting the fact that functions are free to return functions as results.
    - Curried functions can be used to create partially applied ones, something you cannot do if you use tuples to hold multiple arguments.
    - `Int -> Int -> Int -> Int` means `Int -> (Int -> (Int -> Int))`
- The idea that length can be applied to lists whose elements have any type is made precise in its type by the inclusion of a type variable. Type variables must begin with a lower-case letter.
- Overloaded Types
    - Class constraints: `(+) :: Num a => a -> a -> a`
    - Numbers themselves are also overloaded. For example, 3 :: Num a => a meansthat for any numeric type a, the value 3 has type a. In this manner, the value 3could be an integer, a floating-point number, or more generally a value of any numeric type, depending on the context in which it is used.
- Recall that a type is a collection of related values. Building upon this notion, a class is a collection of types that support certain overloaded operations called methods.
- Note that the Num class does not provide a division method, but as we shall now see, division is handled separately using two special classes, one for integral numbers and one for fractional numbers.
    - For efficiency reasons, a number of prelude functions that involve both lists and integers (such as take and drop) are restricted to the type Int of finite- precision integers, rather than being applicable to any instance of the Integral class. If required, however, such generic versions of these functions are provided as part of an additional library file called Data.List.


> A class (`==`) is a collection of types (`Bool`, `Num`, etc.). A class contains types.
