# Higher-order functions

Formally speaking, a function that takes a function as an argument or returnsa function as a result is called a higher-order function. In practice, however,because the term curried already exists for returning functions as results, theterm higher-order is often just used for taking functions as arguments. It is thislatter interpretation that is the subject of this chapter.Formally speaking, a function that takes a function as an argument or returnsa function as a result is called a higher-order function. In practice, however,because the term curried already exists for returning functions as results, theterm higher-order is often just used for taking functions as arguments. It is this latter interpretation that is the subject of this chapter.

Using higher-order functions considerably increases the power of Haskell, byallowing common programming patterns to be encapsulated as functions withinthe language itself. More generally, higher-order functions can be used to de- fine domain-specific languages within Haskell.

## The `foldr` function

The typical recursive pattern:

```hs
f []     = v
f (x:xs) = x # f xs
```

Where `#` denotes an arbitrary operator. You could use `foldr` to simplify this pattern even more:

```hs
sum :: Num a => [a] -> a
sum = foldr (+) 0
```

```hs
foldr :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> [a] -> b
foldr f v []     = v
foldr f v (x:xs) = f x (foldr f v xs)
```

In practice, however, it is best to think of the behaviour of foldr f v in a non-recursive manner, as simply replacing each cons operator in a list by the function f, and the empty list at the end by the value v. For example, applying the function foldr (+) 0 to the list 1 : (2 : (3 : [])) gives the result 1 + (2 + (3 + 0)) in which : and [] have been replaced by + and 0, respectively.

```hs
length :: [a] -> Int
length = foldr (\_ n -> 1+n) 0
```

## The `foldl` function

The other recursive pattern:

```hs
f v []     = v
f v (x:xs) = f (v # x) xs
```

When a function can be defined using both foldr and foldl, as in the aboveexamples, the choice of which definition is preferable is usually made on groundsof efficiency and requires careful consideration of the evaluation mechanism underlying Haskell, which is discussed in chapter 15.

```hs
foldl :: (a -> b -> a) -> a -> [b] -> a
foldl f v []     = v
foldl f v (x:xs) = foldl f (f v x) xs
```

## The Composition Operator

```hs
(.) :: (b -> c) -> (a -> b) -> (a -> c)
f . g = \x -> f (g x)
```

```hs
twice f x = f (f x)
twice f = f . f
```

> Composition is associative.

```hs
id :: a -> a
id = \x -> x
```

That is, id is the function that simply returns its argument unchanged, and hasthe property that id . f “ f and f . id “ f for any function f. The identityfunction is often useful when reasoning about programs, and also provides a suitable starting point for a sequence of compositions. For example, the composition of a list of functions can be defined as follows:

```hs
compose :: [a -> a] -> (a -> a)
compose = foldr (.) id
```

> We conclude by noting that the case mechanism of Haskell that is used in the above definition allows pattern matching to be used in the body of a definition, and is sometimes useful for avoiding the need to introduce an extra function definition just for the purposes of performing pattern matching.
