# Declaring Types and Classes

## Types

The simplest way of declaring a new type is to introduce a new name for an existing type, using the `type` mechanism of Haskell.

- Type declarations can be *nested*, but **not** *recursive*.
    -  If required, recursive types can be declared using the more powerful `data` mechanism, which will be introduced in the next section.

## Data Declarations

A completely new type, as opposed to a synonym for an existing type, can be declared by specifying its values using the data mechanism of Haskell.

```hs
data Bool = False | True
```

In such declarations, the symbol `|` is read as *or*, and the new values of the type are called *constructors*. As with new types themselves, the names of newconstructors must begin with a capital letter. Moreover, the same constructorname cannot be used in more than one type.

```hs
square :: Float -> Shape
square n = Rect n n

area :: Shape -> Float
area (Circle r) = pi * r^2
area (Rect x y) = x * y
```

Because of their use of arguments, the constructors Circle and Rect are actu- ally constructor functions , which produce results of type Shape from arguments of type Float.

> The difference between normal functions and constructor functions is that the latter have no defining equations, and exist purely for the purposes of building pieces of data.

Not surprisingly, data declarations themselves can also be parameterised. For example, the standard prelude declares the following type:

```hs
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
```

## `newtype` declarations

If a new type has a single constructor with a single argument, then it can also be declared using the `newtype` mechanism.

```hs
newtype Nat = N Int
```

- Using newtype rather than type means that `Nat` and `Int` are differenttypes rather than synonyms, and hence the type system of Haskell ensures thatthey cannot accidentally be mixed up in our programs, for example by using an integer when we expect a natural number.
- Using newtype rather than data brings an efficiency benefit, because newtype constructors such as N do not incur any cost when programs are evaluated, as they are automatically removed by the compiler once type checking is completed. In summary, using newtype helps improve type safety, without affecting performance.

## Recursive Types

```hs
data Nat = Zero | Succ Nat

data List a = Nil | Cons a (List a)

data Tree a = Leaf a | Node (Tree a) a (Tree a)

occurs :: Eq a => a -> Tree a -> Bool
occurs x (Leaf y)     = x == y
occurs x (Node l y r) = x == y || occurs x l || occurs x r

-- This might yield a legitimate sorted list if the tree is a search tree.
flatten :: Tree a -> [a]
flatten (Leaf x)     = [x]
flatten (Node l x r) = flatten l ++ [x] ++ flatten r

occurs' :: Ord a => a -> Tree a -> Bool
occurs' x (Leaf y)                 = x == y
occurs' x (Node l y r) | x == y    = True
                       | x <  y    = occurs x l
                       | otherwise = occurs x r
```

Note that under lazy evaluation, if either of the first two conditions in the node case is True, then the result True is returned without the need to evaluate the remaining conditions.

## Class and Instance Declarations

```hs
class Eq a where
  (==), (/=) :: a -> a -> Bool
  x /= y = not (x == y)

instance Eq Bool where
  False == False = True
  True  == True  = True
  _     == _     = False

-- Extending an existing class:
class Eq a => Ord a where
  (<), (<=), (>), (>=) :: a -> a -> Bool
  min, max             :: a -> a -> a

  min x y | x <= y    = x
          | otherwise = y

  max x y | x <= y    = y
          | otherwise = x
```
### Derived Classes

> Note that for the purposes of deriving instances of the class Ord of ordered types, the ordering on the constructors of a type is determined by their position in its declaration.

> In the case of constructors with arguments, the types of these arguments must also be instances of any derived classes.

>  In the same manner as lists and tuples, values built using constructors with arguments are ordered lexicographically.
