# 1. Introduction

Instead of giving recipes for working on data, functional programming tells the computer what data is.

if a function is called twice with the same parameters, it's guaranteed to return the same result. That's called referential transparency and not only does it allow the compiler to reason about the program's behavior, but it also allows you to easily deduce (and even prove) that a function is correct and then build more complex functions by gluing simple functions together.

Haskell is **elegant and concise**. Because it uses a lot of high level concepts, Haskell programs are usually shorter than their imperative equivalents. And shorter programs are easier to maintain than longer ones and have less bugs.

Haskell was made by some **really smart guys** (with PhDs). Work on Haskell began in 1987 when a committee of researchers got together to design a kick-ass language. In 2003 the Haskell Report was published, which defines a stable version of the language.

Function application (calling a function by putting a space after it and then typing out the parameters) has the highest precedence of them all.

The difference between Haskell's if statement and if statements in imperative languages is that the else part is mandatory in Haskell. In imperative languages you can just skip a couple of steps if the condition isn't satisfied but in Haskell every expression and function must return something. We could have also written that if statement in one line but I find this way more readable.

Another thing about the if statement in Haskell is that it is an expression. An expression is basically a piece of code that returns a value. 5 is an expression because it returns 5, 4 + 8 is an expression, x + y is an expression because it returns the sum of x and y. Because the else is mandatory, an if statement will always return something and that's why it's an expression. If we wanted to add one to every number that's produced in our previous function, we could have written its body like this.

```hs
doubleSmallNumber x = if x > 100
                         then x
                         else x*2
```

Had we omitted the parentheses, it would have added one only if **x** wasn't greater than 100. Note the **'** at the end of the function name. That apostrophe doesn't have any special meaning in Haskell's syntax. It's a valid character to use in a function name. We usually use **'** to either denote a strict version of a function (one that isn't lazy) or a slightly modified version of a function or a variable. Because **'** is a valid character in functions, we can make a function like this.

We can use the let keyword to define a name right in GHCI. Doing let a = 1 inside GHCI is the equivalent of writing a = 1 in a script and then loading it.

Speaking of characters, strings are just lists of characters. "hello" is just syntactic sugar for ['h','e','l','l','o'].

Watch out when repeatedly using the ++ operator on long strings. When you put together two lists (even if you append a singleton list to a list, for instance: [1,2,3] ++ [4]), internally, Haskell has to walk through the whole list on the left side of ++. That's not a problem when dealing with lists that aren't too big. But putting something at the end of a list that's fifty million entries long is going to take a while. However, putting something at the beginning of a list using the : operator (also called the cons operator) is instantaneous.

[1,2,3] is actually just syntactic sugar for 1:2:3:[]. [] is an empty list. If we prepend 3 to it, it becomes [3]. If we prepend 2 to that, it becomes [2,3], and so on.

If you want to get an element out of a list by index, use !!. The indices start at 0.

The lists within a list can be of different lengths but they can't be of different types. Just like you can't have a list that has some characters and some numbers, you can't have a list that has some lists of characters and some lists of numbers.

Lists can be compared if the stuff they contain can be compared. When using <, <=, > and >= to compare lists, they are compared in lexicographical order. First the heads are compared. If they are equal then the second elements are compared, etc.