# 3. Types and Typeclasses

`::` is read as "has type of".

`Integer` stands for, er … also integer. The main difference is that it's not bounded so it can be used to represent really really big numbers. I mean like really big. Int, however, is more efficient.

```hs
ghci> :t head  
head :: [a] -> a  
```

What is this a? Is it a type? Remember that we previously stated that types are written in capital case, so it can't exactly be a type. Because it's not in capital case it's actually a type variable. That means that a can be of any type. This is much like generics in other languages, only in Haskell it's much more powerful because it allows us to easily write very general functions if they don't use any specific behavior of the types in them. Functions that have type variables are called polymorphic functions. The type declaration of head states that it takes a list of any type and returns one element of that type.

## Typeclasses

A typeclass is a sort of interface that defines some behavior. **If a type is a part of a typeclass, that means that it supports and implements the behavior the typeclass describes.** A lot of people coming from OOP get confused by typeclasses because they think they are like classes in object oriented languages. Well, they're not. You can think of them kind of as Java interfaces, only better.

```hs
ghci> :t (>)  
(>) :: (Ord a) => a -> a -> Bool 
```

You can only use `>` if it is of type `Ord`.

Type annotations are a way of explicitly saying what the type of an expression should be. We do that by adding :: at the end of the expression and then specifying a type. Observe:

```hs
ghci> read "5" :: Int  
5  
ghci> read "5" :: Float  
5.0  
ghci> (read "5" :: Float) * 4  
20.0  
ghci> read "[1,2,3,4]" :: [Int]  
[1,2,3,4]  
ghci> read "(3, 'a')" :: (Int, Char)  
(3, 'a') 
```

`Enum` members are sequentially ordered types — they can be enumerated. The main advantage of the Enum typeclass is that we can use its types in list ranges. They also have defined successors and predecesors, which you can get with the succ and pred functions.

All tuples are also part of `Bounded` if the components are also in it.

```hs
ghci> :t (*)  
(*) :: (Num a) => a -> a -> a  
```

It appears that whole numbers are also polymorphic constants. They can act like any type that's a member of the Num typeclass.

