# Typeclasses

- Without typeclasses, such as `==`: we have to use a function with a differentname for every different type that we want to be able to compare.

- Typeclasses define a set of functions that can have different implementations dependingon the type of data they are given. Typeclasses may look like the objects of object-oriented programming, but they are truly quite different

- While it is possible to build sophisticated parsers using the Read type-class, many people find it easier to do so using Parsec, and rely onRead only for simpler tasks.

- Note that there are also many more numeric types available for specific purposes such as interfacing to C.

- Notice that the sort order for Color was based on the order in which the constructorswere defined.

- if  you  defined  a  typedata MyType = MyType (Int -> Bool), the compiler will not be able to derive an instanceof Show because it doesn’t know how to render a function. We will get a compilationerror in such a situation.

- Relaxing a rule from GHC: `{-# LANGUAGE TypeSynonymInstances #-}`.

- Normally, we cannot write an instance of a typeclass for a specialized version of apolymorphic type. The [Char] type is the polymorphic type [a] specialized to the typeChar. We are thus prohibited from declaring [Char] to be an instance of a typeclass.This is highly inconvenient, since strings are ubiquitous in real code.
    - `TypeSynonymInstances`, `OverlappingInstances`

- The newtype keyword exists to give an existing type a new identity, and it has morerestrictions on its uses than the data keyword. Specifically, a newtype can have only onevalue constructor, which must have exactly one field.
    - The compiler treats UniqueID as a different type from Int. As a user of aUniqueID, we know only that we have a unique identifier; we cannot seethat it is implemented as an Int.

- Beyond this, there’s another important difference between data and newtype. A typecreated with the data keyword has a bookkeeping cost at runtime, for example, in orderto track which constructor created a value. A newtype value, on the other hand, canhave only one constructor and so does not need this overhead. This makes it morespace- and time-efficient at runtime.

- Because a newtype’s constructor is used only at compile time and does not even existat runtime, pattern matching on undefined behaves differently for types defined usingnewtype than for those that use data.

- When we don’t export a type’s data constructor, clients of our library can only use thefunctions we provide to construct and deconstruct values of that type. This gives us,the library authors, the liberty to change our internal representation if we need to.

- The monomorphism restriction to which the error message refers is a part of the Haskell98 standard. Monomorphism is simply the opposite of polymorphism: it indicates thatan expression has exactly one type. The restriction lies in the fact that Haskell sometimesforces a declaration to be less polymorphic than we would expect.