# Writing a Library: Working with JSON Data

## A Whirlwind Tour of JSON

- JSON supports four basic types of value—strings, numbers, Booleans, and a special value named null.
- The language provides two compound types: an array is an ordered sequence of values, and an object is an unordered collection of name/value pairs. The names in an object are always strings; the values in an object or array can be of any type.

## Anatomy of a Module

- A source file must have the same base name (the componentbefore  the  suffix)  as  the  name  of  the  module  it  contains.  This  is  why  our  file SimpleJSON.hs contains a module named SimpleJSON.
- The `where` keyword indicates that the body of the module follows.
- `(..)` that follows the name JValue indicates that we are exporting both the type and allof its constructors.
- It might seem strange that we can export a type’s name (i.e., its type constructor), butnot its value constructors. The ability to do this is important: it lets us hide the detailsof a type from its users, making the type abstract.
- The -c option tells ghc to generate only object code. If we were to omit the -c option,the compiler would attempt to generate a complete executable. That would fail, be-cause we haven’t written a main function, which GHC calls to start the execution of astandalone program.
    - The -c option tells ghc to generate only object code. If we were to omit the -c option,the compiler would attempt to generate a complete executable. That would fail, be-cause we haven’t written a main function, which GHC calls to start the execution of astandalone program.
- Any import directives must appear in a group at thebeginning of a module, after the module declaration, but before all other code. Wecannot, for example, scatter them throughout a source file.

- The special value undefined has the type a, so it always typechecks, no matter wherewe use it.

- This style of writing a definition exclusively as a composition of otherfunctions is called point-free style. The use of the word point is not re-lated to the “.” character used for function composition. The termpoint is roughly synonymous (in Haskell) with value, so a point-free ex-pression makes no mention of the values that it operates on