# I/O

- Anything that is type IO something is an I/O action. You can store it and nothing willhappen. I could say writefoo = putStrLn "foo" and nothing happens right then. But ifI later use writefoo in the middle of another I/O action, the writefoo action will beexecuted when its parent action is executed—I/O actions can be glued together to formbigger I/O actions. The () is an empty tuple (pronounced “unit”), indicating that thereis no return value from putStrLn. This is similar to void in Java or C.
    - Produce an effect when performed, but not when evaluated.
    - The type of getLine may look strange to you. It looks like a value, rather than a function.And in fact, that is one way to look at it: getLine is storing an I/O action. When thataction is performed, you get a String. The <- operator is used to “pull out” the resultfrom performing an I/O action and store it in a variable.

- Notice that return call. This is not really the same as return in C or Python. In thoselanguages, return is used to terminate execution of the current function immediately,and to return a value to the caller. In Haskell, return is the opposite of <-. That is,return takes a pure value and wraps it inside IO.

- After you write out 5 bytes, your positionwill be 5, and so on. hTell takes a Handle and returns an IO Integer with your position.
    - The companion to hTell is `hSeek`.
    - Not all Handles are seekable. A Handle usually corresponds to a file, but it can alsocorrespond to other things such as network connections, tape drives, or terminals. Youcan use hIsSeekable to see if a given Handle is seekable.
    - `$ echo John|runghc callingpure.hs`
    - While you could craft a way to manually open files with unique names, the details ofdoing this in a secure way differ from platform to platform.

- Lazy IO
    - The String it returns is evaluated lazily. At the momentyou call hGetContents, nothing is actually read. Data is only read from the Handle as theelements (characters) of the list are processed. As elements of the String are no longerused, Haskell’s garbage collector automatically frees that memory. All of this happenscompletely transparently to you. And since you have what looks like (and, really, is) apure String, you can pass it to pure (non-IO) code.
    - you can think of the String between readFile and writeFile as a pipe linkingthe two. Data goes in one end, is transformed some way, and flows back out the other.

- Every statement, except let, in a do block must yield anI/O action that will be executed.

- Also, functionsthat end with an underscore typically discard their result.

- Why a mapM when we already have map? Because map is a pure function that returns alist. It doesn’t—and can’t—actually execute actions directly. mapM is a utility that livesin the IO monad and thus can actually execute the actions.

- The >> operator sequences two actions together: the first action is performed, and thenthe second. The result of the computation is the result of the second action

- Many command-line programs are interested in the parameters passed on the com-mand line. System.Environment.getArgs returns IO [String] listing each argument.This is the same as argv in C, starting with argv[1]. The program name (argv[0] in C)is available from System.Environment.getProgName.